                                                   COMP462/562
                           Project 1: Non-prehensile Manipulation Planning
                                                       (Total points: 22)
                     In this project, we will implement a physics-based planner for nonprehensile tabletop manip-
                  ulation. Specifically, we consider manipulation tasks where the robot needs to rearrange some
                  surrounding movable objects by pushing so that certain task goals will be achieved. An example
                  task environment is illustrated in Figure 1. For this, among other possibilities, we will implement
                  the algorithm of Kinodynamic Rapidly-exploring Random Tree (Kinodynamic RRT).
                       Report:   Areport (3 points) is required for this project. The requirements of what
                       to be included in the report are highlighted in the description.
                     We will use a 7-DoF Franka Emika Panda robot simulated in PyBullet. A code framework,
                  hosted on github (https://github.com/robotpilab/COMP462/tree/main/project1), is
                  provided to facilitate the implementation. The kinodynamic motion planning problems considered
                  in this project are modeled by three major components:
                     1. State space: Under the quasi-static assumption (i.e., the motion of the robot and the objects
                       are slow enough such that the inertial forces are neglectable), the state space of the problem
                       is defined by the Cartesian product of the robot’s joint space and the state space of all the
                       movable objects in SE(2). In other words, a state (of the system) consists of the robot’s joint
                       angles and the poses (i.e., positions and orientations) of all movable objects, relative to a
                       fixed world frame. For example, if there are two movable objects in the workspace, the
                       state space will be 7 + 2 × 3 = 13 dimensional, since the robot has 7 joints and each object
                       adds 3 more dimensions for its position and orientation in SE(2) (i.e., x, y, and θ).
                     2. Control space: We define the control in the Cartesian space of the robot end-effector. Specif-
                       ically, the control consists of the end-effector’s linear velocity (x˙, y˙), and angular velocity
                                       ˙
                       about the z-axis θ, associated with the duration of the control d. We represent a control by
                                      ˙
                       the vector [x,˙ y˙,θ,d]. To execute such a control on the robot manipulator, we need to project
                       it onto the robot’s joint space, as will be described in Task 1.
                     3. Physics law: The physics of the entire robot-object-environment system is commonly repre-
                       sented by a propagation function. The propagation function takes the current system state
                       and a control as inputs and will infer the state at the next time step. In this project, rather
                       than analytically deriving the propagation function, we will use the physics engine in the
                       simulator as our propagation function.
                  Figure 1: A 7-DoF robot manipulator rearranging cubic objects in PyBullet simulator. The fixed
                  world frame is shown by the three colored orthogonal axes (red: x-axis; green: y-axis; blue: z-axis).
                                                              1
                         Note:    For code submission, except for the optional Task 4, please write your codes
                         only inside the TODO (i.e., do not change or add anything outside the TODO).
                         We will import your implemented functions for grading. You will lose points if the
                         functions cannot run due to a modification outside the TODO.
                    Task 1: Jacobian-based Control Projection (7 points)
                    To more effectively represent and plan pushing-based manipulation motions, the control is defined
                    in the Cartesian space of the end-effector as stated above. As such, the robot’s motion is constrained
                    such that its end-effector only moves parallel to the plane where manipulation happens. To execute
                    such end-effector motions with a robot arm, one needs to iteratively project the Cartesian controls
                    to the robot’s joint space and command the robot with the projected joint velocities.
                       Instead of analytically calculating the time derivatives of the forward kinematics, the first task
                    in this project is to numerically calculate the Jacobian matrix of the robot and use it to project
                    the Cartesian velocity controls of the end-effector to the robot’s joint velocities that can be used
                    to move the robot arm. Major steps for this task are detailed below.
                      1. (4 points) Implement the following member method of the JacSolver class in jac.py for
                         calculating the jacobian matrix of the robot:
                              def get_jacobian_matrix(self, joint_values)
                                   """
                                   Numerically calculate the Jacobian matrix based on joint angles.
                                   args: joint_values: The joint angles of the query configuration.
                                                          Type: numpy.ndarray of shape (7,)
                                   returns:            J: The calculated Jacobian matrix.
                                                          Type: numpy.ndarray of shape (6, 7)
                                   """
                         Given that the robot has 7 degrees of freedom, the Jacobian matrix should be 6 × 7 and
                         relate the Cartesian velocities (the twist of the end-effector) and the robot’s joint velocities
                         by the following equation:
                                                                v         ˙
                                                                 ω =J(q)q
                         where the notations are
                                            ⊤
                          (a) v = [v ,v ,v ]   is the linear velocity of the end-effector in 3D space;
                                    x  y   z
                                              ⊤
                          (b) ω = [ω ,ω ,ω ]    is the angular velocity of the end-effector, which can be interpreted
                                     x   y  z
                              as rotating about the axis ω at a rate of ∥ω∥;
                                                         ∥ω∥
                                                                                         ˙
                          (c) q is a 7-dimensional vector of the robot’s joint angles, and q is a 7-dimensional vector
                              of the robot’s joint velocities;
                          (d) J(q) is the 6 × 7 Jacobian matrix when the robot is at the configuration q.
                         The Jacobian matrix should be computed column-wise by finite differences. Remember that
                         each column of the Jacobian matrix corresponds to one robot joint. The provided member
                         function JacSolver.forward kinematics() for the robot’s forward kinematics can be used
                         in this implementation if needed.
                         For implementing this part, it might be useful to do kinematics-related calculations, e.g.,
                         transformations, conversions between different orientation representations, etc. Feel free to
                         use libraries like PyKDL (http://docs.ros.org/en/diamondback/api/kdl/html/python),
                         or transformation-related functions provided by pybullet (https://docs.google.com/do
                         cument/d/10sXEhzFRSnvFcl3XxNGhnD4N2SedqwdAvK3dsihxVUA/edit#heading=h.y6v0hy5
                         2u8fg).
                                                                   2
                                                                                         ˙
                               2. (3 points) Next, given a control [x,˙ y˙,θ,d] for the end-effector (x˙ and y˙ for x- and y- linear
                                                                   ˙
                                   velocities respectively, θ for angular velocity about z-axis, and d for the duration), iteratively
                                   evaluate the Jacobian matrix and use it to calculate the projected joint velocities for executing
                                   this control on the 7-DoF robot arm. In theory, the Jacobian needs to be updated as often
                                   as possible, i.e., with high update resolution, to ensure smooth execution of the constrained
                                   motions. Please read the code to understand how often is the Jacobian updated in the
                                   provided framework.
                                   It is worth noting that this control only specifies values for some dimensions of the desired
                                   Cartesian velocity, not all dimensions. Therefore, it is needed to construct the complete
                                   desired Cartesian velocity (twist of the end-effector) by setting the unspecified dimensions to
                                                                  ˙ ⊤
                                   zero, i.e., [x,˙ y˙, 0, 0, 0, θ]   .
                                   For this, you need to implement the TODO in the following function PandaSim.execute() in
                                   sim.py:
                                          def execute(self, ctrl, sleep_time=0.0):
                                                 """
                                                 Control the robot by Jacobian-based projection.
                                                 args:               ctrl: The robot’s Cartesian velocity in 2D and its
                                                                               duration - [x_dot, y_dot, theta_dot, duration]
                                                                               Type: numpy.ndarray of shape (4,)
                                                           sleep_time: sleep time for slowing down the simulation
                                                                               rendering. (you don’t need to worry about this
                                                                               parameter)
                                                 returns:            wpts: Intermediate waypoints of the Cartesian trajectory
                                                                               in the 2D space.
                                                                               Type: numpy.ndarray of shape (# of waypoints, 3)
                                                                   valid: True or False, indicating whether all intermediate
                                                                               states are valid and high-quality.
                                                 """
                                   Basically, the Jacobian matrix of the robot needs to be evaluated iteratively by calling
                                   self.get jacobian matrix(), and be used to calculate the projected joint velocities. The
                                   joint velocities should be represented by a numpy.ndarray of shape (7,), and stored in the
                                   variable vq.
                                After completing this part, the following command can be invoked in the terminal to test the
                            program: python main.py --task 1
                                If both the Jacobian calculation and the control projection are implemented correctly, you
                            should see the robot’s end-effector moving along a square path parallel to the ground plane while
                            rotating itself about the z-axis for 10 times, as illustrated in Figure 2.                               The quality of robot
                            motion, defined by the accuracy of the Jacobian-based control, will be evaluated by the Cartesian
                            differences between the executed and the desired motion trajectories. The averaged Cartesian
                            motion errors are printed in the terminal standard output. You are expected to have less than
                            0.005-meter positional error and less than 0.017-radian orientational error to pass our grading test.
                            Figure 2: An illustration of the expected robot motions in Task 1. The end-effector moves along
                            a square path shown by black arrows while rotating itself about the z-axis.
                                                                                              3
                               Report:     For numerically calculating the Jacobian in get jacobian matrix(), please
                               try with different values of the finite difference (i.e., different values of ∆q where q
                               denotes the joint angles). Please report how different values of the finite difference
                               affect the accuracy of the Jacobian-based control. Please also report what is a good
                               value for this finite difference ∆q.
                        Task 2: Kinodynamic Motion Planning (6 points)
                        In this part, we will implement the main algorithm of a Kinodynamic RRT. The task of the robot
                        is to push the yellow cube into the red goal region.
                            In the provided code framework, the state of the robot-object system is represented by a
                        dictionary consisting of 2 key-value pairs: 1) "stateID" maps to an unique ID (int) of a state;
                        2) "stateVec" maps to the state values (numpy.ndarray). For a state, the first 7 values of
                        state["stateVec"] (i.e., state["stateVec"][0:7]) are the joint angles of the robot, and the
                        rest values are the poses of all objects in SE(2). Major steps for this task are detailed below.
                           1. (2 points) A class ProblemDefinition is provided in pdef.py. This class can be used to
                               access any information relevant to the manipulation problem, including, for example, the
                               simulation instance, the goal, the bounds for state and control, etc. Finish the following
                               member method of ProblemDefinition for the state validity checker that will later be used
                               by the manipulation planner:
                                    def is_state_valid(self, state)
                                          """
                                          Check if a state is valid or not.
                                          args: state: The query state of the system.
                                                             Type: dict, {"stateID": int, "stateVec": numpy.ndarray}
                                          returns: Ture or False
                                          """
                               For a state to be valid, you need to check and make sure the following criteria are met:
                                (a) The state satisfies the bounds of the state space.
                                     Hint: self.bounds state.is satisfied(state) can be called to check this.
                                (b) There is no collision between the robot and the ground.
                                     Hint: self.panda sim.is collision(state) can be called to check if the simulation
                                     instance has any collision between the robot and the ground.
                                (c) To facilitate planning efÏciency, the robot’s end-effector must be inside the workspace,
                                     i.e., x  , y   ∈ [−0.35,0.35] where x , y           denotes the x-y coordinates of the robot’s
                                            ee  ee                              ee    ee
                                     end-effector in the world frame. You can call
                                     self.panda sim.jac solver.forward kinematics(joint values) for forward kine-
                                     matics to access the robot’s end-effector’s pose with respect to the robot base
                                     (Note: the robot base is placed at [-0.4, -0.2, 0] with zero orientation in the world
                                     frame). For the use of this function, please refer to JacSolver.forward kinematics()
                                     at Line 18 in jac.py.
                               Aside from the state validity checker implemented above in is state valid(), we need
                               another function to check, in a higher frequency, if the state is high-quality for the task. In
                               our case, this is to check whether the robot has good manipulability at the query state.
                               For this, you need to finish the following member method of the class ProblemDefinition
                               provided in pdef.py. You are required to calculate the volume-based manipulability given
                               the Jacobian matrix of the robot at the query state. The state is high-quality when the
                               volume-based manipulability is greater than a threshold of 0.01.
                                                                                 4
                            def is_state_high_quality(self, J)
                                """
                                Check if a state is high-quality enough or not for the task.
                                args: J: The Jacobian matrix of the robot at the query state.
                                          Type: numpy.ndarray of shape (6, 7)
                                returns: Ture or False
                                """
                         Report:    Please read the codes of PandaSim.execute() in sim.py (the one you
                         finished in Task 1) and understand how these two checkers (i.e., is state valid()
                         and is state high quality()) are used. Please briefly report how the two checkers
                         will affect the execution of the robot, respectively.
                     2. (4 points) Implement the main algorithm of the Kinodynamic RRT. Please first read and
                       understand the provided classes Tree and Node in rrt.py. They relate to the data structure
                       that will be used by the Kinodynamic RRT planner. Below is a quick example of how to
                       declare Node instances, set its associated controls, set its parent node, and add nodes to an
                       instance of Tree, as illustrated in Figure 3.
                                    Figure 3: A basic example of how to use Node and Tree.
                       Now, implement the following method of KinodynamicRRT class in rrt.py. It should return
                       True and the motion plan (a list of Node) if the planner finds the solution within the given
                       time budget (in seconds), otherwise, it should return False and None.
                            def solve(self, time_budget)
                                """
                                The main algorithm of Kinodynamic RRT.
                                args:  time_budget: The planning time budget (in seconds).
                                returns:     solved: True or False.
                                               plan: The motion plan found by the planner,
                                                      represented by a sequence of tree nodes.
                                                      Type: a list of rrt.Node
                                """
                       It is strongly recommended to read the provided code of other relevant classes (Node, Tree,
                       StateSampler, ControlSampler, etc) that might be called. Some hints for implementing
                       the planner:
                        (a) self.state sampler.sample()canbeusedtosampleastatevectorwithinthebounds,
                            and self.control sampler.sample to(node, stateVec, k) can be called to sample
                            k candidate controls from node towards stateVec. The latter has two returns: 1)
                            the best control among candidates whose outcome state is nearest to stateVec; 2) the
                            outcome state associated with this best control.
                                                              5
                           (b) self.pdef.goal.is satisfied(node) can be called to check if a node satisfies the
                                goal.
                        After completing this part, the following command can be invoked in the terminal to test the
                     implementation: python main.py --task 2
                        You will be able to see the robot fast simulate its motions for finding a solution. After a
                     solution plan has been found, you will see the robot slowly execute the solution plan. Meanwhile,
                     the end-effector’s trajectory will be drawn by red lines, as illustrated in Figure 4.
                     Figure 4: An example showing the robot executing a solution plan to push the yellow target object
                     into the red goal region. The end-effector’s trajectory is drawn by red lines.
                     Task 3: Grasping in Clutter (2 points)
                     In this part, we will implement the goal criterion function for a grasping task. As a reference, the
                     relocating goal in the previous Task 2 is implemented by RelocateGoal in goal.py
                        Complete the following method of class GraspGoal in the same file. The GoalGrasp has been
                     provided with a member variable self.jac solver of the type jac.JacSolver() to help with
                     necessary kinematics calculation.
                          def is_satisfied(self, motion):
                               """
                               Check if the state satisfies the GraspGoal or not.
                               args: state: The state to check.
                                               Type: dict, {"stateID": int, "stateVec": numpy.ndarray}
                               returns: True or False.
                               """
                        For a grasp to be feasible, the end-effector should be close enough to the target cube and the ori-
                     entation of the end-effector should be well aligned with the target cube. In a state, the pose of the
                     target cube in SE(2)(i.e., x     , y     andθ       ) can be accessed by state["stateVec"][7:10].
                                                 target target      target
                        Please see Figure. 5, which is a top-view of the end-effector and the target cube, for how
                     to implement the grasping goal criterion. Specifically, when the grasping goal is achieved, the
                     perpendicular distance from the target cube to the end-effector plane should be less than 0.01
                     meter (i.e., d < 0.01), and the target cube should be located between the end-effector’s grippers
                                  1
                     (i.e., d < 0.02). Moreover, the angle between the end-effector and the horizontal axis of the
                            2
                     target cube should be less than 0.2 radians (i.e., γ < 0.2). (Note: γ is not necessarily the
                     difference angle between the end-effector and the target cube’s orientation θ                  since
                                                                                                              target
                     the gripper can grasp the target cube from any pair of the cube sides.
                                                                      6
                  Figure 5: The illustration of the grasping goal criterion by a top-view of the end-effector and the
                  target cube. The gray object represents the end-effector and the yellow square represents the target
                  cube. For a state to achieve the grasping goal, you need to make sure d1 < 0.01, d2 < 0.02 and
                  γ < 0.2.
                     After completing this part, the following command can be invoked in the terminal to test the
                  implementation: python main.py --task 3. This command will run the algorithm implemented
                  in Task 2 for the new grasping task. If the grasping goal is implemented correctly, you should
                  be able to see the end-effector moving towards the target object while the solution plan is being
                  executed. The robot should successfully grasp the target object with its fingers.
                  Figure 6: An example of the robot executing a solution plan to approach the yellow target object
                  for grasping. In the end, the end-effector will grasp the target object by closing its fingers. The
                  end-effector’s path is drawn by red lines. If you do not see a similar final configuration as shown
                  in this figure after your planner finishes, you planner is probably not able to find a valid grasp.
                  Task 4: Trajectory Optimization (Optional, 4 points)
                  In this task we will implement some trajectory optimization techniques for a relocating or grasping
                  task. Feel free to implement any functions in opt.py and call the function under TODO in main.py
                  to run the implemented methods with the following command: python main.py --task 4.
                     Anything relevant to the optimization of the manipulation motion trajectory will be of interest.
                  For example, the length of the solution path can be minimized, or the total motion of non-target
                  objects can be minimized. Stochastic trajectory optimization [1] can be a potential approach for
                  this task. Note that the solution generated by the planner implemented in Task 2 can be used to
                  generate an initial solution to be optimized.
                       Report:   Please show your method and the relevant findings in the report. To show
                       the result, you are encouraged to add figures of the initial and optimized trajectories
                       to your report for comparison.
                                                              7
            References
            [1] Wisdom C Agboh and Mehmet R Dogar. Real-time online re-planning for grasping under
              clutter and uncertainty. In 2018 IEEE-RAS 18th International Conference on Humanoid Robots
              (Humanoids), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2018.
                                        8
